---
title: Kedro Pipeline in Jupyter Notebooks
--- 

As mentioned in the [environments_overview](../first_steps/environments_overview.md), kedro may be used with [Jupyter notebooks](https://docs.kedro.org/en/stable/notebooks_and_ipython/kedro_and_notebooks.html) for interactive experiments. This allows us to utilise data and models generated by pipeline runs in Jupyter notebooks, as well as to take advantage of the functions and classes in the Kedro project codebase. 

Jupyter notebooks should be created in the directory `pipelines/matrix/notebooks/scratch`. This will be ignored by the matrix git repository. 

!!! tip
    A separate git repository for notebook version control may be created inside the `scratch` directory. It can also be nice to create a symbolic link to `scratch` from a directory of your choice on your machine. 

    An example notebook is also added to our documentation [here](./walkthroughs/kedro_notebook_example.ipynb which you can copy into the scratch directory for a quickstart

Within a notebook, first run a cell with the following magic command:

```python
%load_ext kedro.ipython
```

By default, this loads the `base` Kedro environment which is used only with fabricated data. 
To load the `cloud` Kedro environment with real data, run another cell with the following command:
```python
%reload_kedro --env=cloud
```

These commands define several useful global variables on your behalf: `context`, `session`, `catalog` and `pipelines`.

In particular, the `catalog` variable provides an interface to the Kedro data catalog, which includes all data, models and model outputs produced during the latest `cloud` run of the Kedro pipeline. The following command lists the available items in the data catalog:
```python
catalog.list()
```
Items may be loaded into memory using the `catalog.load` method. For example, if we have a catalog item `modelling.model_input.splits`, it may be loaded in as follows: 
```python
splits = catalog.load('modelling.model_input.splits')
```

Functions and classes in the Kedro project source code may be imported as required. For example, a function `train_model` defined in the file `pipelines/matrix/src/matrix/pipelines/modelling/nodes.py` may be imported as follows:
```
from matrix.pipelines.modelling.nodes import train_model
```

Some of the walkthrough notebooks integrate jupyter functionality with kedro well. If you want to learn more about kedro & jupyter integration, more information may be found [here](https://docs.kedro.org/en/stable/notebooks_and_ipython/kedro_and_notebooks.html). 

Below you can find some walkthroughs which utilise jupyter functionality within matrix & kedro project:

- [Implementing Custom Modelling](./walkthroughs/custom_modelling.ipynb)

[Plugging into cloud Environment from Jupyter :material-skip-next:](./cross_environments.md){ .md-button .md-button--primary }